Hello, hello hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English.
The show where you can listen to
fascinating stories, and learn weird
and wonderful things about the world at
the same time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today we
are going to be talking about a
subject that is close to my heart,
both emotionally and geographically.
And that is the question of how Malta,
a tiny country in the middle of the
Mediterranean Sea, became a, if not
the, global centre for online gambling.
It’s a fascinating story that gets you
thinking about the interconnectedness
of the global economy, what small
countries do to survive, how wealth
is created, distributed and shared, or
not shared, and how this affects the
societies where this all takes place.
So, I hope you’ll enjoy it.
OK then, Poker Island, the story of How
Malta Became An Online Gambling Hub.
It was a quarter past seven
on a Saturday morning.
I was queuing to pay in a local
supermarket, holding my young son’s hand.
We'd gone out to buy butter and milk,
as making pancakes on a Saturday morning
had become somewhat of a ritual for us.
In front of me in the queue were two
tall, blond haired men in their mid-20s.
They'd clearly not yet gone to
sleep, it had been a busy night,
and they were buying cigarettes
and beers to keep them going.
They were both red in the face, and
rubbing their noses, telltale signs
that all manner of substances were
still flowing through their bloodstream.
The cashier scanned the last item,
and told the first man the price.
“Fourteen Euros twenty seven please”.
“Sure”, he said, in a Scandinavian accent.
He reached into his pocket, bringing out
a huge wad of 50 euro notes, thousands
if not tens of thousands of Euros simply
hanging loose in his trouser pocket.
He tried to take one out and hand it to
the cashier, but as he did so he fumbled,
with the rest falling to the floor.
I looked down at the ground, which was
covered with what must have been thousands
of Euros falling all around his feet.
The man didn’t seem to notice me, but
bent down and started picking up the
dropped fifties, stuffing them into his
pocket like he was picking up rubbish.
“You’ve missed one”, said the
cashier kindly, pointing out a
fifty Euro note under his foot.
“Thanks”, said the man, collecting his
change, the beer and cigarettes, picking
up the remaining fifty, and joining
his friend who was waiting outside.
So, what were these men doing in Malta,
why did they have so much money that it
was falling out of their pockets, what
has this all meant to a tiny island nation
and what can we learn from all of this?
Well, I should start with a brief
introduction to the location, the
place we are talking about today.
It’s called Malta, and it’s
a tiny island, or technically
collection of three islands, in the
Mediterranean, just south of Sicily.
If you picture Sicily, the football at
the bottom of Italy, then you go almost
exactly 100km south, you will hit Malta.
But you’ll need to look very
carefully, because it’s easy to miss.
The island of Malta itself is only 246
km squared, and the entire country,
which consists of two other smaller
islands, is only 316 km squared.
To put that in perspective, the
metropolitan area of London is 8,382
kilometres square, so you could
fit almost 27 Maltas inside London.
And to go on a very quick, a whistestop,
tour of Maltese history, it has been
occupied by everyone from the Phoenicians
to the Knights of Malta, then briefly
the French before being occupied
by the British for over 150 years.
It is, essentially, a tiny rock in
the middle of the Mediterranean.
It was useful from a strategic point of
view, because it has a deep harbour and
was a useful place for other powers to
hold, but there really isn't anything
there, no natural resources, no oil
or gas, it’s just a rock in the sea.
And it has gone through periods of
great wealth and abject poverty,
with the rulers of the day often
enjoying lavish standards of living
while the local people, well, didn’t.
It became independent from the UK
technically in 1964, but not fully
until 1979, when the British navy left.
And although it is an independent country,
with a fiercely proud people, it still
retains many signs of its former occupier:
English is one of the two official
languages, they drive on the same side of
the road as in the UK, the electric plugs
are the same, they even have the same
distinctive red post boxes as in the UK.
And after it gained its independence,
the Maltese economy did grow relatively
healthily, but it started from a
very low bar - in 1980 the GDP per
capita was around €12,000, less than
half of its closest neighbour, Italy.
To put it another way, it was a very
poor country with not much going
for it apart from good weather.
Fast forward to the modern day and
Malta is one of the fastest-growing
economies in Europe, with Ferraris
cruising down the streets and
luxury yachts docked in its marinas.
So, what happened?
Well, two words: online gambling.
Over the past almost 20 years Malta has
transformed itself from a cheap package
holiday destination to the Las Vegas
of the Mediterranean, or perhaps more
accurately the Las Vegas of the Internet.
On the first of May, 2004, when along
with Cyprus, the Czech Republic,
Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania,
Poland, Slovakia and Slovenia,
Malta joined the European Union.
15 became 25, and the union now
encompassed the majority of the
continent’s geographical area.
Clearly, even if online gambling didn’t
exist, joining the EU would have been a
huge boom for Malta, as it allowed free
movement through other member countries,
and made it much more attractive both as
a holiday destination and a destination
for people to come and learn English, and
then travel to other countries in the EU.
But we are talking about gambling,
so why is this important?
Well, before the ink was dry on the
agreement for Malta to join the EU,
politicians in Malta had a plan.
The plan was to create a regulatory
framework to give licences to
online gambling operators, which
would allow them to what’s called
“passport” to other jurisdictions.
To operate an online casino you need a
licence, and casinos could set up shop,
they could base themselves in Malta, and
then allow gamblers from all over the
world to play on their online casinos.
So, Malta created this favourable
regulatory framework, meaning that it
was relatively easy and affordable to
get a licence to start an online casino,
and start accepting customers from
everywhere from Stockholm to Berlin.
Malta also has several other advantages
for these online gambling companies.
The first was a very low corporate
tax rate, effectively 5%.
When compared to the tax rates
in Scandinavia, which is a
particularly popular region for
online gambling, clearly there were
considerable savings to be made.
Secondly, and again this is related
to costs, Malta’s low cost of living
and low salaries, at least 20 years
ago, meant that online gambling
companies could pay what would have
been low wages in Stockholm but
would have allowed their employees
to live lavish lifestyles in Malta.
Now it’s a completely different
story, as I’ll come to explain, but
even 10 years ago it was possible to
earn a salary of, let’s say, €1,500 a
month in Malta and live like a king.
And a third factor was
simply geographical.
It’s a tiny Mediterranean island with
beaches and sun most of the year.
Compared to the dark winters of
Northern Europe, well, you can see
the attraction of 300 days of sun.
So, what happened?
Sure enough, the Maltese
government's plan worked.
Slowly but surely, companies upped
sticks, they moved south, attracted
by favourable legislation, low
taxes, and the possibility of
paying their staff significantly
less than they were paid before.
The first company came, then the
second, the third and the fourth,
and now there are literally hundreds
of online gambling companies.
As the Maltese government hoped, employees
from these first companies left to start
their own companies, employing more
people, paying taxes, renting apartments,
buying food, doing all the sort of
things that people do, all the sort of
things that bring money into an economy.
And on the subject of money,
especially in the early days of online
gambling in Malta, these companies
would make eye-watering amounts of
money, often with very small teams.
It was a complete gold rush, and
18-year-olds working on websites from
around their kitchen table ended up making
millions of Euros every single month.
Now, before we get into the impact
of this, it’s worth giving you
a brief outline of how online
gambling works, because after all,
the money comes from somewhere.
So, there is you or me, the person who
decides that they want to gamble online.
Well, not actually me, perhaps
not you, but according to some
statistics, up to 20% of the
world’s population gambles online.
So, what happens?
Well, there is a person,
let’s call him Jim.
Jim probably searches on Google for
something like “best casino bonuses”,
he’ll find a website with a load of
reviews, he’ll click on a link to
a casino that promises to give him
€100 if he deposits €100, let’s say.
He’ll go to that online casino,
he’ll deposit his €100, the casino
will give him an extra €100 to play
with, but statistically speaking,
he’ll probably end up losing it all.
Or he might win a little bit, then
he’ll lose a bit, he might deposit some
more money because he thinks “I almost
won, let me just have one last try”.
But he’ll end up losing
everything he put in.
And where does this money go?
If you’re thinking, “well, it just
goes to the online casino”, well
let me tell you it’s usually a
bit more complicated than that.
The first recommendation website,
called an affiliate, will most likely
get a percentage of what Jim lost.
The casino will normally license the
actual game from a game provider,
and they might get a percentage of
what Jim deposited, or what he lost.
And the company that manages the flow
of money might also get something.
The rest goes to the casino operator.
And Jim, of course, well,
he’s left with nothing.
If he had deposited enough money, perhaps
the casino’s internal systems would
have flagged him as a “high potential”
player, a “VIP”, and he might get a nice
message from someone informing him that
they’ll give him more credit to come back.
So he deposits more money to get
the credit, maybe he even wins big.
Perhaps he might win tens
of thousands of Euros.
But if he does, in many cases the casino
will give him the money back in smaller
tranches, not the entire amount at once.
Unless, that is, he wants to use
it as credit in the casino, in
which case he can have it all
back immediately to play at once.
So, Jim decides to do this, after
all, he got lucky last time.
Then he loses it all again.
And if Jim was a really big fish,
someone gambling tens of thousands of
Euros every day, he would probably have
someone who would text him at all hours
of the day, inviting him to concerts,
on holidays, to sporting events, and
showering him with gifts, all with the
intention of getting him to log back in
to the casino and deposit more money.
There’s a saying in English, “the
house always wins”, meaning that
the casino always comes out on top,
that you can never beat the casino.
And it’s a saying for a
very good reason; it’s true.
And although some casinos do go bust,
they do lose money, statistically
speaking they will always come out on top.
Now, why am I mentioning this,
why am I going into such detail?
I’m certainly not advocating
that you start gambling online.
As you probably know, it can be a
slippery slope, can be addictive,
and leads to the destruction of
marriages, homelessness, and suicide.
So don’t start.
But I mention it because the important
thing to underline is that every single
cent that has come into Malta through
online gambling has come from someone
like Jim, often sitting alone on their
mobile phone in a toilet cubicle at
their office, typing their bank details
into yet another online casino to try
to regain the feeling of that first win.
The adverts for these online casinos show
glamorous men and women having fun at
poker tables, but the reality is that it’s
much more likely to be someone on their
own playing a slot machine on their phone.
And when it comes to quite how much money
online gambling has brought to Malta, how
much money has been lost by these players,
by punters, the sums are enormous.
Today the online gambling
industry directly contributes
around 14% of Malta’s GDP, and is
worth around €2 billion a year.
€2 billion might sound like pocket
change, a small sum, for a larger
country, but remember this is one
of the smallest countries in Europe.
It’s about €4,000 for every person
on the island, every single year.
It has become a key employer, responsible
for tens of thousands of people,
and remember this is out of a local
population of under half a million people.
And some of the biggest online
gambling companies in the world
are now based here, or at least
have some of their operations here.
Indeed, 10% of all online gambling
companies have a presence in Malta,
in this small country that would
be a tiny neighbourhood of London.
And what has this done to Malta?
What has it done to the island?
Well, for lots of people it has meant
that they have made lots of money, with
some growing spectacularly wealthy.
For the casino owners, the people and
companies who own the affiliate websites
and the game providers, clearly they
have been direct beneficiaries of this.
But this isn’t restricted to the people
directly involved in online gambling.
There has been a property boom
in Malta over the past 10 years,
with property prices rising
200% in the space of a decade.
Indeed, if you come to Malta today, there
is barely a single place on the island
where you will not be able to hear a
large pneumatic drill in the background.
This is good news for property
developers and the construction industry,
but for almost everyone else it is
destructive, in the literal sense.
You’ll see beautiful old townhouses being
knocked down by wrecking balls, you’ll
see the previously unspoilt countryside
with huge cranes dotting the landscape.
There’s even a joke that Maltese
people tell, that the “crane” is
now the national bird of Malta.
With this influx of people and money,
it has meant that the cost of living
has increased hugely, and young people
starting out with their first jobs
have very little chance of ever owning
their own apartment unless they have
help from their parents, or if they
join an online gambling company.
But the effects of Malta
becoming an online gambling
hub are even further reaching.
Specifically, it has made it an even
more attractive destination for organised
criminals to launder their profits.
Now, real-life physical casinos
have long been used by criminals
to launder their money.
Dirty cash goes in, and it comes
out at the end clean as a whistle.
Online casinos on some levels
make this slightly harder, because
digital money leaves a trace, but
on another level it makes it much
easier, because you don’t have to
physically take the cash to the casino.
As a result, organised criminals have
used, and still use, Maltese online
casinos to launder billions of dollars.
Indeed, in January of 2023, there was
an EU report that described Malta and
I’m quoting directly, “a mafia paradise
where billions of illegally obtained
euros are laundered”, and an “ATM, a
cash machine, for the Italian mafia”.
But, you might be thinking, I thought
you said there was a regulator for
this industry, that Malta was one
of the first countries to create
a system to regulate all of this?
Well, yes, but the regulators aren’t
always very good at regulating.
Indeed, two of the most senior executives
at the Malta Gaming Authority, the
government authority that regulates
the online gambling industry,
have been charged with corruption.
In the case of the former CEO,
literally the boss of the regulator,
he was charged with selling insider
information to a man named Yorgen Fenech.
If you recognise that name,
he is also the man accused of
masterminding the assassination of
the journalist Daphne Caruana Galizia.
So, although Malta is very keen to
portray itself as a clean and respectable
place to do business, when the man
responsible for regulating an industry
is accused of doing deals with the
country’s most famous murder suspect,
well it doesn’t exactly ooze confidence.
And indeed, not only because of this,
but because of a wide range of financial
scandals, Malta was actually placed on
something called the “grey list” by the
“FATF”, the Financial Action Task Force.
We don’t need to go into detail
of exactly what this is, but it is
essentially a naughty list of countries
believed to be involved in money
laundering and crooked behaviour.
It's now off this “grey list”, after
promising to better regulate the
financial sector, but as that EU report
is evidence of, there are still plenty
of people who believe that Maltese online
casinos are a vital part of organised
criminals’ money laundering operations.
So, what next?
The past 15 years or so have been
characterised by huge economic growth and
increased levels of prosperity in Malta,
driven predominantly by its transformation
into the Las Vegas of the Med.
But what does the future hold?
Well, it seems like the good times
are not going to last forever.
Many of the reasons that made Malta
an online casino paradise are no
longer, or at least they are not
as attractive as they once were.
Many Northern European countries don’t
allow online casinos from Malta to
operate in their jurisdiction, or if
they do, they are heavily regulated.
What’s more, the cost of living
in Malta has dramatically
increased since the early 2000s.
Whereas even 10 years ago a company
might have been able to pay an employee
€1,500 a month and that employee would
have been very happy, this now no longer
affords them the same standard of living.
Sure, it’s still cheaper than
Stockholm, but not so much cheaper.
What’s more, there is the constant
construction, pollution, and
traffic, and in many respects the
quality of life is a lot lower.
So it’s harder to attract people
to come versus 15 years ago.
And because there are now so
many online gambling companies,
competition is much harder, and the
heyday is, according to some, over.
Indeed, several online gambling
companies have left the island
altogether, because there simply
aren’t enough reasons to stay.
So, if this is a reversing trend, if
online gambling has peaked in Malta,
what's next for this little rock?
Well, Malta has always been
quite creative in its quest to
attract money to the island.
First there was online gambling, then
the country started selling citizenship,
selling passports, it experimented
with cryptocurrency in 2017, and
Maltese politicians have made bold but
unsubstantiated claims about becoming
a centre for Artificial Intelligence.
One thing is for sure, and that is that
Malta hasn’t yet managed to find another
“golden goose”, another industry to
attract that will bring as much money
into the island as online gambling has.
For many in Malta, this
isn’t such a bad thing.
After all, the arrival of online
casinos fundamentally changed the
character of the country and kickstarted
a period of development that turned
the country into a construction site.
Sure, it left many people with heavier
wallets, with more zeros on their bank
balance, but for anyone who wasn’t
directly involved, and who didn’t
reap the benefits, they were left
scratching their heads and asking
themselves, “who really won the jackpot?”
OK then, that is it for today's episode
on the rise of online gambling in Malta.
I hope it's been an interesting one,
and that you've learnt something new.
As always, I would love to know
what you thought of this episode.
Have you been to Malta before?
In case you weren’t aware, it’s a big
destination for people coming to learn
English, although this is now dwarfed by
the size of the online gambling industry.
If you have been, did you know
that the country was such a
centre for online gambling?
I would love to know, so let’s
get this discussion started.
You can head right into our
community forum, which is at
community.leonardoenglish.com and get
chatting away to other curious minds.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds, by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.